Added exemplar topic (#34147)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/basics/exemplars.md

+++
title = "Exemplars"
description = "Exemplars"
keywords = ["grafana", "concepts", "exemplars", "prometheus"]
weight = 400
+++

# Exemplars

> An exemplar is a specific trace representative of a repeated pattern of data in a given time interval. It helps you identify higher cardinality metadata from specific events within time series data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _exemplar_ is a specific trace representative of a repeated pattern of data in a given time interval. It helps you identify higher-cardinality metadata from specific events within time series data.
```

Author: No need for italics here.

> Suppose your company’s website is experiencing a surge in traffic volumes. While more than eighty percent of the users are able to access the website in under two seconds, some users are experiencing a higher than normal response time resulting in bad user experience. To identify the factors that are contributing to the latency, you have to compare a trace for a fast response against a trace for a slow response. Given the vast amount of data in a typical production environment, it will be extremely laborious and time consuming effort. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose your company website is experiencing a surge in traffic volumes. While more than eighty percent of the users are able to access the website in under two seconds, some users are experiencing a higher than normal response time resulting in bad user experience

To identify the factors that are contributing to the latency, you must compare a trace for a fast response against a trace for a slow response. Given the vast amount of data in a typical production environment, it will be extremely laborious and time-consuming effort. 
```

> Use exemplars to help isolate problems within your data distribution by pin-pointing query traces exhibiting high latency within a time interval. Once you localize the latency problem to a few exemplar traces, you can combine it with additional system based information or location properties to perform a root cause analysis faster, leading to quick resolutions to performance issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use exemplars to help isolate problems within your data distribution by pinpointing query traces exhibiting high latency within a time interval. Once you localize the latency problem to a few exemplar traces, you can combine it with additional system based information or location properties to perform a root cause analysis faster, leading to quick resolutions to performance issues.
```

> Support for exemplars is available for the Prometheus data source only. Once you enable the functionality, exemplars data is available by default. For more information on exemplar configuration on how to enable exemplars, refer to [configuring exemplars in Prometheus data source]({{< relref "../datasources/prometheus.md" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for exemplars is available for the Prometheus data source only. Once you enable the functionality, exemplars data is available by default. For more information on exemplar configuration and how to enable exemplars, refer to [configuring exemplars in Prometheus data source]({{< relref "../datasources/prometheus.md" >}}).
```

+++
title = "Exemplars"
description = "Exemplars"
keywords = ["grafana", "concepts", "exemplars", "prometheus"]
weight = 400
+++

> # Exemplars

Reviewer: To match the rest of the basics, a lot of which will be something like, "What is logging? What are metrics?", Please change this to something that indicates this is a basic-level concept topic.

What are exemplars?
Intro to exemplars

Don't forget to update the file name to match.

To identify the factors that are contributing to the latency, you must compare a trace for a fast response against a trace for a slow response. Given the vast amount of data in a typical production environment, it will be extremely laborious and time-consuming effort. 

Use exemplars to help isolate problems within your data distribution by pinpointing query traces exhibiting high latency within a time interval. Once you localize the latency problem to a few exemplar traces, you can combine it with additional system based information or location properties to perform a root cause analysis faster, leading to quick resolutions to performance issues.

Support for exemplars is available for the Prometheus data source only. Once you enable the functionality, exemplars data is available by default. For more information on exemplar configuration and how to enable exemplars, refer to [configuring exemplars in Prometheus data source]({{< relref "../datasources/prometheus.md" >}}).

> Grafana shows exemplars alongside a metric in the Explore view and in Dashboards. Each exemplar displays as a highlighted star. You can hover your cursor over an exemplar to view the unique traceID, which is a combination of a key value pair. To investigate further, click on the blue button next to the `traceID` property. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grafana shows exemplars alongside a metric in the Explore view and in dashboards. Each exemplar displays as a highlighted star. You can hover your cursor over an exemplar to view the unique traceID, which is a combination of a key value pair. To investigate further, click the blue button next to the `traceID` property. 
```

Reviewer: Does the button not have a name?

Author: I will expand on this capability later.
